Adds specificity lesson (#5019)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/learn/css/specificity/index.md

---
title: Specificity
description:
authors:
  - andybell
date: 2021-04-02
tags:
  - css
---

# Specificity

Suppose that you're working with the following HTML and CSS:

```html
<button class="branding">Hello, Specificity!</button>
```

```css
button {
  color: red;
}

.branding {
  color: blue;
}
```

There's two competing rules here.
One will color the button red and the other will color it blue.
Which rule gets applied to the element?
Understanding the CSS specification's algorithm about specificity
is the key to understanding how CSS decides between competing rules.

Specificity is one of the four distinct stages of the cascade,

> which you learned about in the last module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which was covered in the last module, on [the cascade](/learn/css/the-cascade/).
```

<figure class="w-figure">
{% Codepen {
  user: 'web-dot-dev',
  id: 'YzNKMXm'
} %}
</figure>

## Specificity scoring

Each selector rule gets a scoring.
You can think of specificity as a total score and each selector type earns points towards that score.
The selector with the highest score wins.

With specificity in a real project,
the balancing act is making sure the CSS rules you expect to apply, actually *do apply,*
while generally keeping scores low to prevent complexity.
The score should only be as high as we need it to be,

> rather than going for the highest score possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rather than aiming for the highest score possible.
```

In the future, some genuinely more important CSS might need to be applied.
If you go for the highest score, you'll make that job hard.

## Scoring each selector type

Each selector type earns points.
You add all of these points up to calculate a selector's overall specificity.

### Universal selector

A universal selector (`*`) has **no specificity** and gets **0 points**.
This means that any rule with 1 or more points will override it

```css
* {
	color: red;
}
```

### Element or pseudo-element selector

An element (type) or pseudo-element selector gets **1 point of specificity** .

> ### Type selector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Type selector
```

Author: these are subheads of "scoring each selector type" so this change seems odd. Can you explain the reasoning?

Reviewer: noticed that the organization (at least for the first bit) was:

### Type

Explanation of type, how many **points** type gives

#### Subtype

demo

#### Subtype

demo

Author: I think I get what you mean now, I'm committing these so I can see them in the doc as I need to pull it down to add the aside about double classes.

```css
div {
	color: red;
}
```

> ### Pseudo-element selector

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Pseudo-element selector
```

```css
::selection {
	color: red;
}
```

### Class, attribute or pseudo-class selector

A class or pseudo-class selector gets **10 points of specificity**.

> Class selector:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Class selector
```

Author: Then these ones could be an h4, as they are sub-sub heads because there is a h3 which is https://deploy-preview-5019--web-dev-staging.netlify.app/learn/css/specificity/#class-attribute-or-pseudo-class-selector

```css
.my-class {
	color: red;
}
```

> Pseudo-class selector:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Pseudo-class selector
```

(Just updating these for more consistency with the above)

```css
:hover {
	color: red;
}
```

> Attribute selector:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Attribute selector
```

	color: red !important; /* 10,000 points */
	background: white; /* 10 points */
}
```

@@TODO: self-assessment 1

## Specificity in context

The specificity of each selector that matches an element is added together.
Consider this example HTML:

```html
<a class="my-class another-class" href="#">A link</a>
```

This link has two classes on it.
Add the following CSS, and it gets **1 point of specificity**:

```css
a {
  color: red;
}
```

Reference one of the classes in this rule,
it now has **11 points of specificity**:

```css
a.my-class {
  color: green;
}
```

Add the other class to the selector,
it now has  **21 points of specificity**:

```css
a.my-class.another-class {
  color: rebeccapurple;
}
```

Add the `href` attribute to the selector,
it now has **31 points of specificity**:

```css
a.my-class.another-class[href] {
  color: goldenrod;
}
```

Finally,add a `:hover` pseudo-class to all of that,
the selector ends up with **41 points of specificity**:

```css
a.my-class.another-class[href]:hover {
  color: lightgrey;
}
```

@@TODO: self-assessment 2

## Visualizing specificity

In diagrams and specificity calculators,
the specificity is often visualized like this:

> {% Img src="image/VbAJIREinuYvovrBzzvEyZOpw5w1/d1q5VKbFOQG2TBXoBtgm.png", alt="A diagram demonstrating most specific to least specific selectors", width="800", height="474" %}

Reviewer: TODO: ADD TO #5001

The left group is `id` selectors.
The second group is class, attribute, and pseudo-class selectors.
The final group is element and pseudo-element selectors.

For reference, the following selector is `0-4-1`:

```css
a.my-class.another-class[href]:hover {
  color: lightgrey;
}
```

@@TODO: self-assessment 3

## Pragmatically increasing specificity

Let's say we have some CSS that looks like this:

```css
.my-button {
	background: blue;
}

button[onclick] {
	background: grey;
}
```

With HTML that looks like this:

```html
<button class="my-button" onclick="alert('hello')">Click me</button>
```

<figure class="w-figure">

> {% Codepen {

Reviewer: @robdodson @devnook would it be possible to have an option for which tabs to show? I.e. I think here, showing the CSS tab next to the result is useful. Current default just shows the default.

Reviewer 2: I believe that option exists ([handbook](https://web.dev/handbook/web-dev-components/#codepen)). To show CSS and results, you'd do the following:

```njk
{% Codepen {
  user: 'robdodson',
  id: 'GRroyyX',
  height: 300,
  theme: 'dark',
  tab: 'css,result',
  allow: ['geolocation']
} %}
```

Author: Maybe this is a task we can do as a preflight, go through them all and make sure they each show the optimal arrangement of tabs?

Reviewer: Sounds good, i'll make an issue to track this

Reviewer: #5081

  user: 'web-dot-dev',
  id: 'abpoxdR'
} %}
</figure>

The button has a grey background,
because the second selector earns **11 points of specificity** (`0-1-1`).
This is because it has one type selector (`button`),
which is **1 point** and an attribute selector (`[onclick]`), which is **10 points**.

The previous rule—`.my-button`—gets **10 points** (`0-1-0`),
because it has one class selector.

If you want to give this rule a boost,

> repeat the class selector like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a little hack you could do is to repeat the class selector like this:
```

Author: I'm not a fan of the term "hack" here, it's not a "hack", it's as per spec.

Reviewer: The way it's written now in the content hierarchy makes it seem like it's common/the norm to write double classes like this. How can we call out that this isn't common behavior, though something to be aware of?
